---
title: Notes on Iteratees
author: Alex Beal
date: 2018-01-04
type: post
permalink: iteratee-notes
---

*Note: Here's a post, originally written in 2015, that I found while looking through my archive of drafts. It's a bit dense, but I think it's helpful as a companion to the Iteratees paper. Further, I think this is a good example of what people mean when they say they can understand something via its type, or that the types can aid in documentation. I don't think the types could completely replace Oleg's original write up, but when an abstraction is compositional, starting from a small set of primitives and building up to something greater, there's a real sense in which an understanding of those primitives and their types can be used as a compass that guides you across the larger landscape.*

These are notes I wrote while reading Oleg Kiselyov's *Iteratees*.[^1] They focus on trying to give the types meaning. When confronted with abstractions such as this (ones where many things follow from a very small core), I find it helpful to think carefully about what the types imply. Once I develop that intuition, using the library becomes much easier.

```  haskell
type Iteratee el m a
```

An `Iteratee` is a stream processor. It processes a stream of elements `el` using the abilities of some monad `m` and producing a result `a`. One way of viewing this is as a fold over some stream with elements `el`. Compare this to `foldM`:

``` haskell
foldM :: (Foldable t, Monad m) => (a -> el -> m a) -> a -> t el -> m a
```

The first two parameters, `(a -> el -> m a)` and `a`, describe how to process elements of type `el` in a monad `m` and produce a value `a`. This is similar to how `Iteratee el m a` is a processor of elements of type `el` in `m` producing `a`.

``` haskell
-- Counts the number of spaces in a stream of `Char`s.
countSpaces :: Iteratee Char Identity Int
```

The function above is what an Iteratee that counts spaces might look like. It folds over a stream of `Char`, needing no effects (thus the `Identity` monad) and producing as a result the number of spaces in the stream. Making the `Iteratee` polymorphic in `m` will be useful later on, when we look at `Enumerator`.

``` haskell
countSpacesPure :: Monad m => Iteratee Char m Int
```

The result of an `Iteratee` can be extracted with `run`.

``` haskell
run :: Monad m  => Iteratee el m a -> m a
```

We can extract the result of `countSpaces` with `run`. It will evaluate to `0` since no source of elements was supplied.

``` haskell
runIdentity (run countSpaces) -- returns 0
```

To supply it with elements we use an `Enumerator`.

``` haskell
type Enumerator el m a = Iteratee el m a -> m (Iteratee el m a)
```

An `Enumerator` is a producer. It produces a stream of elements of type `el`. It may make use of some effect `m` to produce these elements (perhaps it uses `IO` to read from a file). Finally, it produces a result of type `a`.

Unwrapping the type, we see that it needs to be supplied with an `Iteratee el m a`. This is the processor that the Enumerator produces elements for. The result, `m (Iteratee el m a)`, describes a processor running in the `Enumerator`'s effect, `m`. Why is it running in `m`? Because the `Enumerator` makes use of `m`'s effect to produce elements for the processor.

Notice that the return type, `m (Iteratee el m a)`, forces the fold and the producer to use the same effect. This is why `m` is made generic in `countSpacesGeneric` above, otherwise the producer would be restricted to the Identity effect (and could not, for example, read from a file). This sharing of `m` also means we can bind the result to `run` to extract the final value:

``` haskell
runEnum :: Monad m => m (Iteratee el m a) -> m a
runEnum = (>>= run)
```

What does it mean for a producer `Enumerator el m a` to have a result of type `a`? Why would a producer have a result at all? Notice that `a` is the type of the Iteratee's result. So the result of an Enumerator is just the result of running the fold over the elements the `Enumerator` provides.

Flipping the arguments of `foldM` and partialy supplying a source of elements (in this case the `List` `[1,2,3]`) resembles an `Enumerator`:

``` haskell
(flip foldM) [1,2,3] :: a -> (a -> el -> m a) -> m a
```

Like an Enumerator, this supplies the stream `[1,2,3]` to some processor described by `a` and `(a -> el -> m a)` and produces a result of type `a` using effect `m`.

``` haskell
type Enumeratee elIn elOut m a =
  Iteratee elOut m a -> Iteratee elIn m (Iteratee elOut m a)
```

An `Enumeratee` is a transformer. It consumes elements `elIn` and produces elements `elOut`. This gives a result of type `a` and may make use of some effect `m`.

Like an `Enumerator`, it takes an `Iteratee` as an argument. This is the `Iteratee` that `elOut`s are supplied to. This results in a nested processor--a processor that produces another processor. The nested processor looks like this: `Iteratee elIn m (Iteratee elOut m a)`. Examining this more closely, we see that it's a processor that consumes elements of the input type, `elIn`, and whose inner result is of type `a`. Since only the supplied processor can produce a value of type `a` (the `Iteratee` that's an argument to the `Enumeratee`), we can conclude that the supplied processor must be run to produce the `a`. So we have a transformer: something that folds over elements of type `elIn`, pipes those to a fold for `elOut` and produces the result `a`. It is both a producer for the given `Iteratee elOut m a` and a consumer for elements `elIn`.

Similar to how the return type of an `Enumerator`, `m (Iteratee el m a)`, is a processor being supplied `el`s with the help of `m`, an `Iteratee elIn m (Iteratee elOut m a)` is an Iteratee being supplied elements with the help of another Iteratee.

Finally, let's examine the program-interpreter view of Iteratees: "Iteratee processes are modeled as a data type; enumerators become interpreters, thus defining the semantics of iteratees as parsers of an enumerator’s source."[^2]

Changing this slightly, an `Iteratee el m a` is a program that takes input `el` to evaluate to a result `a`. An `Enumerator el m a` then becomes an interpreter for these programs that can supply elements of type `el`. So, just as you can apply an interpreter to a program, you can apply an `Iteratee` to an `Enumerator`:

``` haskell
type Enumerator el m a = Iteratee el m a -> m (Iteratee el m a)
```

`m (Iteratee el m a)` is now a program supplied with input with the help of `m`. Notice, though, that the program is only partially interpreted. In order to finish interpretation, we need to terminate the inner `Iteratee` and extract the result. This is the role of `run :: Iteratee el m a -> m a`. Binding `run` to the program terminates it and gets the final result.

An Enumeratee then becomes an interpreter which produces another program in `IO`. 

``` haskell
programWithInputFromIO :: IO (Iteratee el IO a)
programWithInputFromIO >>= run :: IO a
```

[^1]: Iteratees. Kiselyov, Oleg. [http://okmij.org/ftp/Haskell/Iteratee/describe.pdf](http://okmij.org/ftp/Haskell/Iteratee/describe.pdf)
[^2]: Section 3, Page 9 of *Iteratees*.